**G1** (Garbage First) is default GC since JDK 11.

G1 is trying to keep balance between latency and throughput.

So you may expect pauses about 10-1000 ms and 5-15% of throughput cost.

G1 is regions based GC with generations.

Young generation is collected with pause 
and old generation is collected concurrently.

G1 splits heap into regions with the same size.
It could be 1-64 MB depends on heap size.
By defould G1 trying to have 2048-4096 regions in total.  

There are 5 type of regions (so-called spaces):

1. Eden space. New objects are allocated here.
2. Survivor space. Objects which were survived after eden collection moved here. 
3. Old space.  
4. Archive space.
5. Humongous space. Humongous objects are objects larger or equal the size of half a region.

**Eden** and **survivor** spaces are the **Young** generation.

**Old** and **Humongous** spaces is the **Tenured** generation.

New objects are allocated in **Eden** space.
When **Eden** space is full, GС starts young generation collection.

You will see that in GC log:

```
Pause Young (Normal) (G1 Evacuation Pause) 6883M->752M(10240M) 4.196ms
```

After this operation **Eden** space became free and
all survived objects will be promoted to **Survivor** space.

The main idea of keeping pauses close to target is
change size of **Eden** space depends on previous pause time.
If pause is too long G1 would decrease size of **Eden**
which follows to more often GC iteration with fewer data.
In opposite case G1 would increases size of **Eden** space to reduce throughput penalty.

If your application satisfies a hypothesis about generations,
G1 would most of the time spend in young collections.

But eventually **Old** space became full and G1 triggered **Concurrent Mark Cycle**.

You will see that in GC log:

```
Concurrent Mark Cycle
Reclaimed 255 empty regions
Pause Remark 6932M->4892M(10240M) 64.999ms
Concurrent Mark Cycle 12840.693ms
```

As you see even *concurrent* operation has pauses.

After **Concurrent Mark Cycle** G1 start **Mixed GC**:

```
Pause Young (Prepare Mixed) (G1 Evacuation Pause) 8423M->5628M(10240M) 29.131ms
Pause Young (Mixed) (G1 Evacuation Pause) 5900M->4699M(10240M) 25.553ms
```

Which will collect **Young** generation and maybe **Tenured** generation if it has a lot of garbage.

The most terrible event is **To-space exhausted**.

It happens when G1 has no free space to promotion object after surviving.
Such event means application create garbage faster than G1 collects it.
So in worst case it will trigger **Full GC**:

```
GC(101) To-space exhausted
GC(101) Pause Young (Normal) (GCLocker Initiated GC) 10187M->9983M(10240M) 62.297ms
GC(102) To-space exhausted
GC(102) Pause Young (Normal) (G1 Evacuation Pause) 10231M->10231M(10240M) 61.498ms
GC(103) Clear Next Bitmap 11.036ms
GC(103) Pause Full (G1 Evacuation Pause) 10231M->1077M(10240M) 321.573ms
```

You could read more about G1 GC:

1. [Oracle tutorial](https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/tutorials/tutorials-1876574.html)
2. [Presentation at the conference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OhPGN2Av44E)
3. [Oracle gc tuning post](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/gctuning/garbage-first-g1-garbage-collector1.html)
